+++
title = "The influence of the host plant is the major ecological determinant of the presence of nitrogen-fixing root nodule symbiont cluster II Frankia species in soil"
date = "2017-01-01"

# Authors. 
authors = ["Kai Battenberg", "Jannah A Wren", "Janell Hillman", "**Joseph Edwards**", "Liujing Huang", "Alison M Berry"]

# Publication type.
# Legend:
# 0 = Uncategorized
# 1 = Conference proceedings
# 2 = Journal
# 3 = Work in progress
# 4 = Technical report
# 5 = Book
# 6 = Book chapter
publication_types = ["2"]

# Publication name and optional abbreviated version.
publication = "*Applied and Environmental Microbiology*"
publication_short = "In *AEM*"

# Abstract and optional shortened version.
abstract = "The actinobacterial genus Frankia establishes nitrogen-fixing root nodule symbioses with specific hosts within the nitrogen-fixing plant clade. Of four genetically distinct subgroups of Frankia, cluster I, II, and III strains are capable of forming effective nitrogen-fixing symbiotic associations, while cluster IV strains generally do not. Cluster II Frankia strains have rarely been detected in soil devoid of host plants, unlike cluster I or III strains, suggesting a stronger association with their host. To investigate the degree of host influence, we characterized the cluster II Frankia strain distribution in rhizosphere soil in three locations in northern California. The presence/absence of cluster II Frankia strains at a given site correlated significantly with the presence/absence of host plants on the site, as determined by glutamine synthetase (glnA) gene sequence analysis, and by microbiome analysis (16S rRNA gene) of a subset of host/nonhost rhizosphere soils. However, the distribution of cluster II Frankia strains was not significantly affected by other potential determinants such as host-plant species, geographical location, climate, soil pH, or soil type. Rhizosphere soil microbiome analysis showed that cluster II Frankia strains occupied only a minute fraction of the microbiome even in the host-plant-present site and further revealed no statistically significant difference in the α-diversity or in the microbiome composition between the host-plant-present or -absent sites. Taken together, these data suggest that host plants provide a factor that is specific for cluster II Frankia strains, not a general growth-promoting factor. Further, the factor accumulates or is transported at the site level, i.e., beyond the host rhizosphere."
abstract_short = "Biological nitrogen fixation is a bacterial process that accounts for a major fraction of net new nitrogen input in terrestrial ecosystems. Transfer of fixed nitrogen to plant biomass is especially efficient via root nodule symbioses, which represent evolutionarily and ecologically specialized mutualistic associations. Frankia spp. (Actinobacteria), especially cluster II Frankia spp., have an extremely broad host range, yet comparatively little is known about the soil ecology of these organisms in relation to the host plants and their rhizosphere microbiomes. This study reveals a strong influence of the host plant on soil distribution of cluster II Frankia spp."

# Featured image thumbnail (optional)
image_preview = ""

# Is this a selected publication? (true/false)
selected = false

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this publication with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter the filename (excluding '.md') of your project file in `content/project/`.
#projects = ["example-external-project"]

# Links (optional).
url_pdf = "http://aem.asm.org/content/83/1/e02661-16.full.pdf"



# Custom links (optional).
#   Uncomment line below to enable. For multiple links, use the form 
#url_custom = [{name = "Custom Link", url = "http://example.org"}]

# Does the content use math formatting?
math = true

# Does the content use source code highlighting?
highlight = true

# Featured image
# Place your image in the `static/img/` folder and reference its filename below, e.g. `image = "example.jpg"`.
#[header]
#image = "headers/Lifecycle.png"
#caption = "Rice plants at different parts of the season :ear_of_rice:"

+++